README.md, before:

plone_server
============

This Ansible role provisions a [Plone](https://plone.org) server with options to control client count and memory profile. It uses either a built-in buildout.cfg or one picked up via git.

This role takes care of:

- Installing the required OS (development-) packages;
- Creating users and groups for running buildout and daemons;
- Downloading a buildout-cache tarball and checking out your buildout if needed;
- Building the ZEO cluster;
- Optional: setting up `supervisor` for process management and autostart;
- Optional: installing cron-jobs for packing the database and backup.

If you'd like to use this role as part of a full-stack configuration kit, see the [Plone Ansible Playbook](https://github.com/plone/ansible-playbook).

This role should be able to work with Plone 4.3.x or 5.0. Just set the version variables documented below.

.. warning::

    Some of the changes made in version 1.2.0 may cause your Plone-related supervisor job names to change.
    To avoid problems, before you first run this version of the role, stop your Plone-related supervisor jobs and remove them from the supervisor/conf.d directory.

Requirements
------------

Since this role creates and uses users and groups, it must be run as part of a playbook that sets sudo to "yes".

Currently working with Debian/Ubuntu and CentOS/Fedora environments. Please put in a pull request if you can help get it going in other ansible's os families (FreeBSD, Gentoo, Suse, etc.).


If you need to log in
---------------------

You should not need to. But if you do, you should know:

1) The Plone zeoserver and zeoclient processes should be run under the plone_daemon login; they will normally be controlled via supervisor;

2) Run buildout as plone_buildout.



Role Variables
--------------

### plone_instance_name

    plone_instance_name: frodos_site

Sets the name that discriminates this install from others. This name should be globally unique on the server as it's used to discriminate between supervisor and cron jobs.

Defaults to `zeoserver`.

### plone_target_path

    plone_target_path: /opt/plone

Sets the Plone installation directory.

Defaults to `/usr/local/plone-{{ plone_major_version }}`

Your install's buildout directory will be {{ plone_target_path }}/{{ plone_instance_name }}.

### plone_var_path

    plone_var_path: /var/plone_var

Sets the Plone installation directory.

Defaults to `/var/local/plone-{{ plone_major_version }}`

Your install's var directory will be {{ plone_var_path }}/{{ plone_instance_name }}.

#### plone_backup_path

    plone_backup_path: /mnt/backup/plone

Where do you want to put your backups? The destination must be writable by the `plone_daemon` user. Subdirectories are created for blob and filestorage backups.

Defaults to your instance's var directory.

Your install's backup directory will be {{ plone_backup_path }}/{{ plone_instance_name }}.

### plone_buildout_git_repo

    buildout_git_repo: https://github.com/plone/plone.com.ansible.git
    buildout_git_version: master

`buildout_git_repo` defaults to none (uses built-in buildout).

`buildout_git_version` is the tag or branch. Defaults to `master`.

> If you use your own buildout from a repository, you still need to specify your client count so that the playbook can 1) set up the supervisor specifications to start/stop and monitor clients, and 2) set up the load balancer.
>
> Client part names must follow the pattern `client#` where # is a number (1,2,3 ...). Client ports must be numbered sequentially beginning with 8081 or the value you set for plone_client_base_port. The zeoserver part must be named `zeoserver` and be at 8100 or the value you set for plone_zeo_port.
>
> If you use your own buildout, all Plone settings except `plone_client_count`, `plone_client_base_port`, and `plone_client_max_memory` are ignored.

### plone_major_version

    plone_major_version: '5.0'

### plone_version

    plone_version: '5.0'

Which Plone version do you wish to install? This defaults to the current stable version at the time you copy or clone the playbook. Make sure plone_major_version and plone_version are string variables or they won't compare correctly.

### plone_initial_password

    plone_initial_password: alnv%r(ybs83nt

Initial password of the Zope `admin` user. The initial password is used when the database is first created. Don't forget to change it.

Defaults to "" -- which will cause the role to halt.


### plone_client_count

    plone_client_count: 5

How many ZEO clients do you want to run?

Defaults to `2`

> The provided buildout always creates an extra client `client_reserve` that is not hooked into supervisor or the load balancer. Use it for debugging, run scripts and quick testing.


### plone_zodb_cache_size

    plone_zodb_cache_size: 30000

How many objects do you wish to keep in the ZODB cache.

Defaults to `30000`

> The default configuration is *very* conservative to allow Plone to run in a minimal memory server. You will want to increase this is you have more than minimal memory.


### plone_zserver_threads

    plone_zserver_threads: 2

How many threads should run per server?

Defaults to `1`


### plone_client_max_memory

    plone_client_max_memory: 800MB

A size (suffix-multiplied using "KB", "MB" or "GB") that should be considered "too much". If any Zope/Plone process exceeds this maximum, it will be restarted. Set to `0` for no memory monitoring.

Defaults to `0` (turned off)

> This setting is used in configuration of the `memmon` monitor in supervisor: [superlance](http://superlance.readthedocs.org/en/latest) plugin.


### plone_additional_eggs

    plone_additional_eggs:
        - Products.PloneFormGen
        - collective.cover
        - webcourtier.dropdownmenus

List additional Python packages (beyond Plone and the Python Imaging Library) that you want available in the Python package environment.

The default list is empty.

> Plone hotfixes are typically added as additional eggs.


### plone_sources

    plone_sources =
      -  "my.package = svn http://example.com/svn/my.package/trunk update=true"
      -  "some.other.package = git git://example.com/git/some.other.package.git rev=1.1.5"

This setting allows you to check out and include repository-based sources in your buildout.

Source specifications, a list of strings in [mr.developer](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/mr.developer) sources format. If you specify plone_sources, the mr.developer extension will be used with auto-checkout set to "*" and git_clone_depth set to "1".


### plone_extension_profiles

    plone_extension_profiles:
        - jarn.jsi18n:default

List additional Plone profiles which should be activated in the new Plone site.  These are only activated if the plone_create_site variable is set.

### plone_zcml_slugs

    plone_zcml_slugs:
        - plone.reload

List additional ZCML slugs that may be required by older packages that don't implement auto-discovery. The default list is empty. This is rarely needed.


### plone_additional_versions

    plone_additional_versions:
      - "Products.PloneFormGen = 1.7.16"
      - "Products.PythonField = 1.1.3"
      - "Products.TALESField = 1.1.3"

The version pins you specify here will be added to the `[versions]` section of your buildout. The default list is empty.


### plone_zeo_port

    plone_zeo_port: 6100

The port number for the Zope database server. Defaults to `8100`.


### plone_client_base_port

    plone_client_base_port: 6080

The port number for your first Zope client. Subsequent client ports will be added in increments of 1. Defaults to `8081`.

### plone_environment_vars

    plone_environment_vars:
        - "TZ US/Eastern"
        - "zope_i18n_allowed_languages en"

A list of environment variables you wish to set for running Plone instances.

Defaults to:

    - "PYTHON_EGG_CACHE ${buildout:directory}/var/.python-eggs"


### plone_client_extras

    plone_client_extras: |
        z2-log-level = error

Extra text to add to all the client buildout parts.


### plone_client1_extras

    plone_client1_extras: |
        webdav-address = 9080
        ftp-address = 8021

Extra text to add to only the first client buildout part.


### plone_autorun_buildout

    plone_autorun_buildout: (yes|no)

Do you wish to automatically run buildout if any of the Plone settings change? Defaults to `yes`.


### plone_buildout_cache_url

    plone_buildout_cache_url: http://dist.plone.org/4.3.4/buildout-cache.tar.bz2

The URL of a buildout egg cache. Defaults to the one for the current stable version of Plone.


### plone_buildout_cache_file

    plone_buildout_cache_file: /home/steve/buildout-cache.tar.bz2

The full local (host) filepath of a buildout egg cache. Defaults to none. Should not be used at the same time as plone_buildout_cache_url.


### Cron jobs

#### plone_pack_at

    plone_pack_at:
      minute: 30
      hour: 1
      weekday: 7

When do you wish to run the ZEO pack operation? Specify minute, hour and weekday specifications for a valid *cron* time. See `CRONTAB(5)`. Defaults to 1:30 Sunday morning. Set to `no` to avoid creation of a cron job.


#### plone_keep_days

    plone_keep_days: 3

How many days of undo information do you wish to keep when you pack the database. Defaults to `3`.


#### plone_backup_at

    plone_backup_at:
      minute: 30
      hour: 2
      weekday: "*"

When do you wish to run the backup operation?  Specify minute, hour and weekday specifications for a valid *cron* time. See `CRONTAB(5)`. Defaults to 2:30 every morning.  Set to `no` to avoid creation of a cron job.


#### plone_keep_backups

    plone_keep_backups: 3

How many generations of full backups do you wish to keep? Defaults to `2`.

> Daily backups are typically partial: they cover the differences between the current state and the state at the last full backup. However backups after a pack operation are complete (full) backups -- not difference operations. Thus, keeping two full backups means that you have backups for `plone_keep_backups * days_between_packs` days. See the [collective.recipe.backup documentation](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/collective.recipe.backup).


#### plone_keep_blob_days

    plone_keep_blob_days: 21

How many days of blob backups do you wish to keep? This is typically set to `keep_backups * days_between_packs` days. Default is `14`.


### Supervisor Control

#### plone_use_supervisor

    plone_use_supervisor: no

When set to `yes` (the default), the role will set up [supervisor](http://supervisord.org/) to start, stop and control the ZEO server and all the clients except the reserved client.


Example Playbook
----------------

Including an example of how to use your role (for instance, with variables passed in as parameters) is always nice for users too:

    - hosts: all
      sudo: yes
      gather_facts: no

      pre_tasks:

        - name: Update host
          apt: upgrade=dist update_cache=yes

      roles:

        - role: plone.plone_server
          plone_initial_password: super_secret

Multiple Server Example
-----------------------

Here's an example playbook that sets up multiple Plone servers on the same target.
Note the use of distinct `plone_instance_name` settings to make sure that cron and supervisor jobs do not collide.

    - hosts: all
      sudo: yes
      gather_facts: yes

      pre_tasks:

        - name: Update host
          apt: upgrade=dist update_cache=yes

      roles:

        - role: plone.plone_server
          plone_instance_name: primary_plone
          plone_target_path: /opt/primary_plone
          plone_var_path: /var/local/primary_plone
          plone_major_version: '5.0'
          plone_version: '5.0'
          plone_initial_password: admin
          plone_zeo_port: 5100
          plone_client_base_port: 5080
          plone_create_site: no

        - role: plone.plone_server
          plone_instance_name: secondary_plone
          plone_target_path: /opt/secondary_plone
          plone_var_path: /var/local/secondary_plone
          plone_major_version: '4.3'
          plone_version: '4.3.7'
          plone_initial_password: admin
          plone_zeo_port: 4100
          plone_client_base_port: 4080
          plone_create_site: no

      tasks:
        - pause: seconds=30

        - name: Check to see if Plone 5 is running
          uri:
            url: http://127.0.0.1:5081/
            method: GET
            status_code: 200

        - name: Check to see if Plone 4.3.x is running
          uri:
            url: http://127.0.0.1:4081/
            method: GET
            status_code: 200


License
-------

GPLv2

Author Information
------------------

Created by Steve McMahon. Maintained by the Plone Installer Team as part of the [Plone](https://plone.org) project.

Commit message:

Documented the plone_client_listen_addr parameter.

README.md, after:

plone_server
============

This Ansible role provisions a [Plone](https://plone.org) server with options to control client count and memory profile. It uses either a built-in buildout.cfg or one picked up via git.

This role takes care of:

- Installing the required OS (development-) packages;
- Creating users and groups for running buildout and daemons;
- Downloading a buildout-cache tarball and checking out your buildout if needed;
- Building the ZEO cluster;
- Optional: setting up `supervisor` for process management and autostart;
- Optional: installing cron-jobs for packing the database and backup.

If you'd like to use this role as part of a full-stack configuration kit, see the [Plone Ansible Playbook](https://github.com/plone/ansible-playbook).

This role should be able to work with Plone 4.3.x or 5.0. Just set the version variables documented below.

.. warning::

    Some of the changes made in version 1.2.0 may cause your Plone-related supervisor job names to change.
    To avoid problems, before you first run this version of the role, stop your Plone-related supervisor jobs and remove them from the supervisor/conf.d directory.

Requirements
------------

Since this role creates and uses users and groups, it must be run as part of a playbook that sets sudo to "yes".

Currently working with Debian/Ubuntu and CentOS/Fedora environments. Please put in a pull request if you can help get it going in other ansible's os families (FreeBSD, Gentoo, Suse, etc.).


If you need to log in
---------------------

You should not need to. But if you do, you should know:

1) The Plone zeoserver and zeoclient processes should be run under the plone_daemon login; they will normally be controlled via supervisor;

2) Run buildout as plone_buildout.



Role Variables
--------------

### plone_instance_name

    plone_instance_name: frodos_site

Sets the name that discriminates this install from others. This name should be globally unique on the server as it's used to discriminate between supervisor and cron jobs.

Defaults to `zeoserver`.

### plone_target_path

    plone_target_path: /opt/plone

Sets the Plone installation directory.

Defaults to `/usr/local/plone-{{ plone_major_version }}`

Your install's buildout directory will be {{ plone_target_path }}/{{ plone_instance_name }}.

### plone_var_path

    plone_var_path: /var/plone_var

Sets the Plone installation directory.

Defaults to `/var/local/plone-{{ plone_major_version }}`

Your install's var directory will be {{ plone_var_path }}/{{ plone_instance_name }}.

#### plone_backup_path

    plone_backup_path: /mnt/backup/plone

Where do you want to put your backups? The destination must be writable by the `plone_daemon` user. Subdirectories are created for blob and filestorage backups.

Defaults to your instance's var directory.

Your install's backup directory will be {{ plone_backup_path }}/{{ plone_instance_name }}.

### plone_buildout_git_repo

    buildout_git_repo: https://github.com/plone/plone.com.ansible.git
    buildout_git_version: master

`buildout_git_repo` defaults to none (uses built-in buildout).

`buildout_git_version` is the tag or branch. Defaults to `master`.

> If you use your own buildout from a repository, you still need to specify your client count so that the playbook can 1) set up the supervisor specifications to start/stop and monitor clients, and 2) set up the load balancer.
>
> Client part names must follow the pattern `client#` where # is a number (1,2,3 ...). Client ports must be numbered sequentially beginning with 8081 or the value you set for plone_client_base_port. The zeoserver part must be named `zeoserver` and be at 8100 or the value you set for plone_zeo_port.
>
> If you use your own buildout, all Plone settings except `plone_client_count`, `plone_client_base_port`, and `plone_client_max_memory` are ignored.

### plone_major_version

    plone_major_version: '5.0'

### plone_version

    plone_version: '5.0'

Which Plone version do you wish to install? This defaults to the current stable version at the time you copy or clone the playbook. Make sure plone_major_version and plone_version are string variables or they won't compare correctly.

### plone_initial_password

    plone_initial_password: alnv%r(ybs83nt

Initial password of the Zope `admin` user. The initial password is used when the database is first created. Don't forget to change it.

Defaults to "" -- which will cause the role to halt.


### plone_client_count

    plone_client_count: 5

How many ZEO clients do you want to run?

Defaults to `2`

> The provided buildout always creates an extra client `client_reserve` that is not hooked into supervisor or the load balancer. Use it for debugging, run scripts and quick testing.


### plone_zodb_cache_size

    plone_zodb_cache_size: 30000

How many objects do you wish to keep in the ZODB cache.

Defaults to `30000`

> The default configuration is *very* conservative to allow Plone to run in a minimal memory server. You will want to increase this is you have more than minimal memory.


### plone_zserver_threads

    plone_zserver_threads: 2

How many threads should run per server?

Defaults to `1`


### plone_client_max_memory

    plone_client_max_memory: 800MB

A size (suffix-multiplied using "KB", "MB" or "GB") that should be considered "too much". If any Zope/Plone process exceeds this maximum, it will be restarted. Set to `0` for no memory monitoring.

Defaults to `0` (turned off)

> This setting is used in configuration of the `memmon` monitor in supervisor: [superlance](http://superlance.readthedocs.org/en/latest) plugin.


### plone_additional_eggs

    plone_additional_eggs:
        - Products.PloneFormGen
        - collective.cover
        - webcourtier.dropdownmenus

List additional Python packages (beyond Plone and the Python Imaging Library) that you want available in the Python package environment.

The default list is empty.

> Plone hotfixes are typically added as additional eggs.


### plone_sources

    plone_sources =
      -  "my.package = svn http://example.com/svn/my.package/trunk update=true"
      -  "some.other.package = git git://example.com/git/some.other.package.git rev=1.1.5"

This setting allows you to check out and include repository-based sources in your buildout.

Source specifications, a list of strings in [mr.developer](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/mr.developer) sources format. If you specify plone_sources, the mr.developer extension will be used with auto-checkout set to "*" and git_clone_depth set to "1".


### plone_extension_profiles

    plone_extension_profiles:
        - jarn.jsi18n:default

List additional Plone profiles which should be activated in the new Plone site.  These are only activated if the plone_create_site variable is set.

### plone_zcml_slugs

    plone_zcml_slugs:
        - plone.reload

List additional ZCML slugs that may be required by older packages that don't implement auto-discovery. The default list is empty. This is rarely needed.


### plone_additional_versions

    plone_additional_versions:
      - "Products.PloneFormGen = 1.7.16"
      - "Products.PythonField = 1.1.3"
      - "Products.TALESField = 1.1.3"

The version pins you specify here will be added to the `[versions]` section of your buildout. The default list is empty.


### plone_zeo_port

    plone_zeo_port: 6100

The port number for the Zope database server. Defaults to `8100`.


### plone_client_listen_addr

    plone_client_listen_addr: 127.0.0.1

The address that the clients will bind to. The default is to bind the the localhost adaptor (127.0.0.1). You can either change this to your specific choice of address, or set it to 0.0.0.0 or just set it to
> plone_client_listen_addr: ""
or
> plone_client_listen_addr:
Which will cause it to listen on all addresses. This parameter is most useful if your web server is not on the same server (or LXC containter for example) as the Plone server, and is instead in it's own container.

### plone_client_base_port

    plone_client_base_port: 6080

The port number for your first Zope client. Subsequent client ports will be added in increments of 1. Defaults to `8081`.

### plone_environment_vars

    plone_environment_vars:
        - "TZ US/Eastern"
        - "zope_i18n_allowed_languages en"

A list of environment variables you wish to set for running Plone instances.

Defaults to:

    - "PYTHON_EGG_CACHE ${buildout:directory}/var/.python-eggs"


### plone_client_extras

    plone_client_extras: |
        z2-log-level = error

Extra text to add to all the client buildout parts.


### plone_client1_extras

    plone_client1_extras: |
        webdav-address = 9080
        ftp-address = 8021

Extra text to add to only the first client buildout part.


### plone_autorun_buildout

    plone_autorun_buildout: (yes|no)

Do you wish to automatically run buildout if any of the Plone settings change? Defaults to `yes`.


### plone_buildout_cache_url

    plone_buildout_cache_url: http://dist.plone.org/4.3.4/buildout-cache.tar.bz2

The URL of a buildout egg cache. Defaults to the one for the current stable version of Plone.


### plone_buildout_cache_file

    plone_buildout_cache_file: /home/steve/buildout-cache.tar.bz2

The full local (host) filepath of a buildout egg cache. Defaults to none. Should not be used at the same time as plone_buildout_cache_url.


### Cron jobs

#### plone_pack_at

    plone_pack_at:
      minute: 30
      hour: 1
      weekday: 7

When do you wish to run the ZEO pack operation? Specify minute, hour and weekday specifications for a valid *cron* time. See `CRONTAB(5)`. Defaults to 1:30 Sunday morning. Set to `no` to avoid creation of a cron job.


#### plone_keep_days

    plone_keep_days: 3

How many days of undo information do you wish to keep when you pack the database. Defaults to `3`.


#### plone_backup_at

    plone_backup_at:
      minute: 30
      hour: 2
      weekday: "*"

When do you wish to run the backup operation?  Specify minute, hour and weekday specifications for a valid *cron* time. See `CRONTAB(5)`. Defaults to 2:30 every morning.  Set to `no` to avoid creation of a cron job.


#### plone_keep_backups

    plone_keep_backups: 3

How many generations of full backups do you wish to keep? Defaults to `2`.

> Daily backups are typically partial: they cover the differences between the current state and the state at the last full backup. However backups after a pack operation are complete (full) backups -- not difference operations. Thus, keeping two full backups means that you have backups for `plone_keep_backups * days_between_packs` days. See the [collective.recipe.backup documentation](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/collective.recipe.backup).


#### plone_keep_blob_days

    plone_keep_blob_days: 21

How many days of blob backups do you wish to keep? This is typically set to `keep_backups * days_between_packs` days. Default is `14`.


### Supervisor Control

#### plone_use_supervisor

    plone_use_supervisor: no

When set to `yes` (the default), the role will set up [supervisor](http://supervisord.org/) to start, stop and control the ZEO server and all the clients except the reserved client.


Example Playbook
----------------

Including an example of how to use your role (for instance, with variables passed in as parameters) is always nice for users too:

    - hosts: all
      sudo: yes
      gather_facts: no

      pre_tasks:

        - name: Update host
          apt: upgrade=dist update_cache=yes

      roles:

        - role: plone.plone_server
          plone_initial_password: super_secret

Multiple Server Example
-----------------------

Here's an example playbook that sets up multiple Plone servers on the same target.
Note the use of distinct `plone_instance_name` settings to make sure that cron and supervisor jobs do not collide.

    - hosts: all
      sudo: yes
      gather_facts: yes

      pre_tasks:

        - name: Update host
          apt: upgrade=dist update_cache=yes

      roles:

        - role: plone.plone_server
          plone_instance_name: primary_plone
          plone_target_path: /opt/primary_plone
          plone_var_path: /var/local/primary_plone
          plone_major_version: '5.0'
          plone_version: '5.0'
          plone_initial_password: admin
          plone_zeo_port: 5100
          plone_client_base_port: 5080
          plone_create_site: no

        - role: plone.plone_server
          plone_instance_name: secondary_plone
          plone_target_path: /opt/secondary_plone
          plone_var_path: /var/local/secondary_plone
          plone_major_version: '4.3'
          plone_version: '4.3.7'
          plone_initial_password: admin
          plone_zeo_port: 4100
          plone_client_base_port: 4080
          plone_create_site: no

      tasks:
        - pause: seconds=30

        - name: Check to see if Plone 5 is running
          uri:
            url: http://127.0.0.1:5081/
            method: GET
            status_code: 200

        - name: Check to see if Plone 4.3.x is running
          uri:
            url: http://127.0.0.1:4081/
            method: GET
            status_code: 200


License
-------

GPLv2

Author Information
------------------

Created by Steve McMahon. Maintained by the Plone Installer Team as part of the [Plone](https://plone.org) project.
